Air communication is commonly thought as the most safe transport type. Because
passenger safety is the main priority of all subjects engaged in air transport, technical,
organization, procedure barriers are established in order to avoid air accidents. Some-
times these facilities fail; in most cases because of human error. To learn lessons from
these failures, accidents are investigated in order to find their causes. Such investiga-
tion is usually qualitative [8].
In the paper, a quantitative analysis of serious incidents is proposed. The "serious
incident" is usually a very dangerous event when some barriers against accident have
failed to meet their goal. They are very important sources of knowledge about safety
assurance systems in air transport. We want to estimate the probability that a given
incident would transform into accident. With that kind of study at disposal, one can
conclude whether safety facilities are sufficient or have to be extended. In order to
evaluate this probability, estimation of safety barrier reliability has to be carried out.
Unfortunately, in most cases there are no sufficient data to infer statistically about the
frequency of events for the accident scenario. Unfortunately, it is highly unlikely to
find that data. There are two reasons of such situation. First is that some of these
events occur very rarely, and additionally, in past the events without significant con-
sequences were not usually recorded. The second one is human factor with suchmeasures that are difficult to evaluate as different reactions probabilities and error
activity probability. Such measures are charged with uncertainty and subjective esti-
mations. Only methods to obtain such knowledge are expert estimates. These estima-
tions are not precise and not sufficient to probabilistic analysis.
In safety, reliability, and risk analysis and management, information often is uncer-
tain and imprecise. In book [10] three approaches to reliability and safety with uncer-
tain and imprecise information are presented: probability and statistics, fuzzy set
theory, possibility theory (inspired by the above).
In paper [1] the following approaches for representation of uncertainty are listed:
probability, imprecise (interval) probability, probability bound analysis, possibility
theory (foundations: probability, statistics, fuzzy sets), Dempster-Shafer evidence
theory.
The approach to air incident analysis presented in our paper is inspired by the pos-
sibility theory.
In air incident analysis both types of components have to be included: static and
dynamic. Static analysis can be executed by means of fault trees with fuzzy probabili-
ties [16, 17] and event trees with fuzzy probabilities [7]. Fuzzy probability is called
possibility. The Dynamic analysis is executed in the time domain. More precisely, the
analysis may be carried out using minimal and maximal values of time parameters
similarly to the safety study of some railroad crossing in [9]. The other approach is
probabilistic when time parameters are represented by probability distributions as in
[2] where time coordination of distance protections in high voltage power transmis-
sion line was considered. The next kind of analysis will be based upon fuzzy set and
will become the topic of the paper.
In this paper, the serious incident which occurred at the Chopin airport in Warsaw
in 2007 year would be analyzed. Only static analysis will be executed, while dynamic
one will be the topic of the following paper. In order to find the probability that given
incident would transform into accident, the analysis of event trees by fuzzy probabili-
ties will be performed. An analysis of incidents using fuzzy inference is illustrated with the example of a
serious air traffic incident which occurred in August 2007 at the Warsaw Chopin air-
port between Boeing 767 and Boeing 737 aircraft. Its cause was classified as a "hu-
man factor" and the causal group H4 – "procedural errors" [18]. In the incident on 13th of August 2007 participated two aircraft – Boeing 737 (B737)
and the Boeing 767 (B767), which more or less at the same time were scheduled for
take-off from the Warsaw Chopin airport. As the first, clearance for line-up and wait
on runway 29 was issued to B737. As a second, clearance for line-up and wait on
runway 33 was given to the B767 crew. The latter aircraft was the first to obtain per-
mission to take-off. A moment after confirmation of permission to take-off, both air-
crafts began the start procedure at the same time. The B737 crew wrongly assumedthat the start permission was addressed to them. They probably thought that since they
had received the permission to line up the runway first, they would be also the first to
be permitted to start. In addition, the categories of wake turbulence caused that from
the traffic efficiency point of view, it would be better to start B737 before B767. De-
cision of the controller, however, was different. The air traffic controller (ATC) did
not watch the planes taking-off, because at this time he was busy agreeing a helicopter
take-off. The situation of simultaneous start was, nevertheless, observed by the pilot
of ATR 72, who was waiting in the queue for departure. He reacted over the radio.
After this message, B767 pilot looked right and saw B737 taking-off. Then, on his
own initiative, braked off and began a rapid deceleration, which led to stopping the
plane 200 meters from the intersection of the runways. The assistant controller heard
the ATR 72 pilot radio message and informed the controller that B737 operated with-
out authorization. The controller, who originally did not hear the information on the
radio, after 16 seconds from the start, recognized the situation and strongly ordered
B737 to discontinue the take-off procedure. The B737 crew performed braking and
stopped 200 m from the intersection of the runways. In the presented example it can be noticed that it is sufficient to impose only one addi-
tional risk factor (or a combination of two factors), and the incident would become, in
fact, an accident. There are several premises conducive for an accident [15].
1. Weather conditions (visibility) are so bad that it is impossible to see the actual traf-
fic situation. This applies to B767, ATR 72 crews, and the air traffic controller.
2. ATR 72 pilot does not watch the situation on the runways, just waiting for permis-
sion to line-up the runway.
3. ATR 72 pilot observes the situation, but does not immediately inform about it on
the radio, instead he discusses it with other members of his own crew.
4. B767 crew, busy with their own take-off procedure, does not pay attention to the
message transmitted over the radio by the ATR 72 pilot.
5. B767 crew takes a wrong decision to continue the take-off, despite noting B737
aircraft. Such decision could arise, for example, with this reasoning: "there is no
possibility to stop before the intersection, let B737 stop - after all, we have a per-
mission to start, maybe we can pass the intersection before the B737", etc.
6. Assistant controller does not pay attention to the information given by radio by the
ATR 72 pilot, or does not respond to it properly - does not inform the controller.
7. B737 crew does not react properly to the air traffic controller command and does
not interrupt the take-off procedure.
